---
layout: post
title: Step 2 of Effective Learning 
published: false
release_date: 2021-10-07
tags: all tools-for-thought
---

Last week I wrote a perspective on Step One of Effective Learning. Part of me thinks that the post is really stupid and obvious. Another part of me thinks that it's still important, because even though I know this fact deeply, I still procrastinate-learn by watching YouTube videos and pretend I'm learning anyways. 

Maybe a better way of phrasing Step 1 is really just that YouTube videos and passive reading are poor substitutes for the real thing. Without understanding that, progress will be slow.

What do you do next to make such progress on your goals? One challenge I've been bumping up against lately with learning and growth is not having a proper path forward. With many side projects, I have a lot of energy I just want to throw at learning, but it's not always well guided or effective. Learning a language is a great example of this, and one reason that apps like DuoLingo have become so popular: it takes all the planning out of learning, and lets you put full energy on just the doing part. 

So, I would argue that Step 2 of Effective Learning is building/finding a curriculum, so that you can throw effort at something and it sticks.

Another great example of this is getting a coach for training/endurance sports. For the better part of 2 years, I paid a coach to give me a weekly training plan. The plan accounted for races I had in the future, and was written by a real professional, someone who knew what he was doing. Having a coach was fantastic because it let focus all my energy on performance and recovery, and gave little room for doubt. Really, having a coach was like going to college - I had an accountability system that I was paying for, that usually pushed me further than I would push myself, and helped me consistently tackle long term goals. 

There are two main options for a curriculum:
1. DIY. Your own curriculum will probably consist of books, articles, and videos, and needs to include exercises where you're actually do instead of pretending to do. 
2. Find a full curriculum, paid or free, that will take you from some arbitrary Point A to Point B. 

I think that option 2 is nearly always better. In the age we live in, anything that can be learned has also already been heavily detailed, and it's naive to think that you can create a better curriculum for yourself on a subject you know nothing about, then an expert who has already followed that same path. 

The hard part, as I'm sure we can all guess, is actually following the curriculum. This is why hiring a coach, or paying money for tuition, are so effective. There's already an accountability structure in place, one that leverages our innate social instincts (i.e. a desire to not fail in front of others) to ensure that we comply. 

I believe that for most people, a curriculum with no accountability will fail[^1]. Sure, there are exceptions to the rule, but even if you're able to succeed with no accountability, I can't imagine a situation in which a vacuum of accountability is better than one with a even small amount. The only real exception is if you want this activity to be purely hobbyistic (then, do it just for fun! and growth will come over time). 


