---
layout: post
title: Consumption
published: true
release_date: 2021-10-01
tags: all tools-for-thought
---
Yesterday (October 4th, 2021), Facebook/Instagram/WhatsApp went down for a while. Like a *really* long time - about 6 hours. In the world of software, where a 2 minute outage can be considered a Major Incident (MI), 6 hours is crazy. And for a company as large as Facebook, many estimates are out there that this cost the company roughly half a **billion** dollars in revenue. 

After the fact, [Mark Zuckerberg put out a statement](https://www.facebook.com/4/posts/10113961365418581/?d=n) about the outage. Except, it wasn't really about the outage. It was more of a rant aimed at the Facebook whistleblower who came out against Facebook with pretty damning information. The whistleblower basically leaked documents showing that Facebook knew it's products were causing rates of depression and suicide in teenager girls to rise dramatically, and yet Facebook wasn't doing anything about it. 

My first thought on all of this is that if I were CEO of a company that was causing suicide rates to rise dramatically in teenage girls, I would probably do something about it. But it's easy to be an armchair expert here. In reality, if Facebook stopped offering its services to teenagers, wouldn't someone else step in to fill the consumer void? What are the actual downstream consequences? Truly, I think we need policymakers to step in and set certain restrictions. But I also think that Facebook should be a part of it. 

Trying to put aside my armchair expert-ism here, I think that it is actually in the best interest of Facebook to put forth temporary restrictions on accounts for people under a certain age. Why? No competitor is going to suddenly fill a micro-vacuum, and Facebook has such an absurd monopoly in the social media space that they can really do whatever they want. Give a one or two week notice and then pause services for users below a certain age until you can figure out a way to let kids use social media without it being absolutely cancerous to their well-being. 

This is in the best interest of Facebook because they're currently following a trajectory very similar to cigarette companies. Put out a product so blatantly bad for it's users for long enough, and eventually lawsuits and policymakers will (theoretically) decide what regulations you need, rather than performing them yourself while you're in a position to. Then, obviously, there's the whole moral reason of not being the root cause of suicide for teenagers in America (though we know by now, Zuckerberg does not have a conscience).

I cannot boycott Facebook and Instagram with my wallet, because I do not pay them money. But I can boycott them with my attention. It will be the smallest drop in the smallest bucket, but for the remainder of October I'm going to move forward with Facebook and Instagram deactivated (Whether or not I use Messenger is up to my friends and family and if they'll join me). 

To me, a life without social media is exciting but kind of sad - some days I have amazing engagement with close friends I haven't seen or chatted with in years. However I imagine that it isn't closer to zero sum than I think - instead of engaging with people on social media, perhaps I'll have more intentional conversations with more people that matter, rather than hours spent mindlessly scrolling. At this point, I'm pretty frustrated that social media is a monopoly, since I would love to just bring my business elsewhere to a company that doesn't try and hoard my attention. 

Did I run today? Yes
Did I play music? Not really. 
Did I write? Yes.
